---
layout: post
title: Pre-publication "disclaimers" and Zika in the USVI marker paper
author: Trevor Bedford
---

I've written before on the moral imperative for [timely data sharing of pathogen genome sequences during an outbreak](/blog/scientific-publishing-practices/), but I also recognize the need to reconcile this demand with the academic career structure where publications are essential currency. With [Alli Black](/team/allison-black) and others from the lab and elsewhere, [we've been attempting our first sequencing work from Zika samples collected from the US Virgin Islands](/blog/sequencing-lab/). We have so far produced 11 Zika genomes, which we have been sharing to a [GitHub repo](https://github.com/blab/zika-seq) along with detailed experimental protocols and bioinformatic pipelines. Up till now, we've had these genomes under a now fairly standard pre-publication "disclaimer" stating that other groups are free to use these genomes, but to seek permission before publication.

I think the rise of these disclaimers (see for example [here](https://github.com/zibraproject/zibraproject.github.io/tree/master/data/consensus), [here](http://virological.org/t/33-zika-virus-genomes-sequenced-from-patient-and-pooled-mosquito-samples/372) and [here](https://github.com/jtladner/ZIKA_Florida/tree/master/sequences)) has generally been a hugely positive improvement over the previous standard practice of waiting until publication to share data. However, these disclaimers have yielded a new problem in the scientific literature and our ability to rapidly progress our shared understanding of an outbreak. Currently, there are three papers on the Zika epidemic in review, one focusing on Florida ([Grubaugh et al](http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/104794)), one focusing on Brazil ([Faria et al](http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/105171)) and one that looks at broader context in the Americas ([Metsky et al](http://doi.org/10.1101/109348)). We've been heavily involved in the first two and in general, I'm hugely impressed with how all the authors have behaved here. I feel fortunate to have gotten a chance to help. However, the disclaimers have created a situation where the Brazil paper can't include all the available data to best analyze the Brazil outbreak because pre-publication disclaimers prevent it. Likewise, the Florida paper can't include all available data to best analyze the Florida outbreak.

In these two cases, the major conclusions may not have changed, but it's still unfortunate that although the sequences are "public", they cannot be published on and so the papers coming out use only a subset of the data that exists. As such the scientific literature is impoverished relative to what it could be. With their sequences, the [Scripps team](http://andersen-lab.com/) (Kristian Andersen, Nathan Grubaugh and Karthik Gangavarapu) just put them on openly Genbank once they passed from draft to finished status.

With all this in mind, we've settled on the following arrangement with our data, one that I think is perhaps a model for how to share data while safeguarding academic credit. We're releasing draft genomes to the [Zika in the USVI GitHub repo](https://github.com/blab/zika-usvi) and will put genomes on Genbank as they move to finished status. We are also releasing a ["marker paper" on bioRxiv](/papers/black-zika-in-usvi) that spells out analyses that we intend to publish on (in this case, an in-depth look at the USVI Zika outbreak) and what constitutes permissible uses for our data. Such permissible uses of the data are immediately allowed. This should prevent the disclaimer [blocking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blocking_(computing)) that is currently going on. We intend to continually update the bioRxiv paper as more genomes are sequenced and we prepare a draft manuscript. This way citations links are maintained as best as possible. I don't think this is a magic bullet to the publishing issues, but I believe this strategy may help.

*TLDR*: If everyone were clearer on "data licenses", everything would be much easier.
